Sesame Street Meets Wall Street’s Record Rally

 This record has been brought to you by the letters A and I. ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌ ‌
 Read in browser To get John Authers’ newsletter delivered directly to your inbox, sign up here . To join us for a live event in New York, register here .
 Today’s Points:
 The S&P 500 is at a new all-time high (despite everything);
 IPOs will make it harder to set new records;
 French yield spreads retreated after Le Pen vowed to cut the deficit ;
 Deeply distressed loans are the highest since the pandemic;
 AND: A new business book reading list .
 To the Victors the Spoils
 It’s getting repetitive. The S&P 500 closed Tuesday at an all-time high, its first since August. The trends driving this are well-known (in Sesame Street terms, this record has been brought to us by the letters A and I ), as is the fact that the advance grows ever narrower.
 Smaller companies have now lost almost all their outperformance versus mega-caps since the start of the year (as measured by the Russell Top 50 and 2000 indexes), while value stocks (bought because they were cheap) have reached a fresh nadir for the decade compared to growth, according to S&P 500 indexes:
 Bear in mind that orthodox market theory recognizes both a “size” and a “value” anomaly - over the long term, small companies and cheap stocks are expected to outperform. So this is very unusual. Putting these trends together, the gap between large growth stocks and small-cap value that has opened since the launch of ChatGPT is now yawning:
 Earnings, of course, justify this. Growth companies should be expected to grow their profits by definition, but the way their earnings outstripped those of value companies in the second quarter was unprecedented in recent history:
 Time will tell if the AI companies’ profits are being made at the expense of everyone else - in which case this cannot continue - or are the prelude to stronger profitability for everyone. The latter would be nice. Third-quarter earnings season, starting next week, should give us the download of evidence on which is more likely.

 Riding the IPO Wave
 Anthropic PBC’s imminent initial public offering (IPO) is shaping up to be the next big test for artificial intelligence following SpaceX’s offering, which was the biggest on record, this summer. Global listings have raked in almost $230 billion in proceeds year-to-date, more than 45% above the total recorded last year. But even accounting for Anthropic, expected by Thanksgiving, we’ll need a remarkable burst of activity to surpass the $373 billion raised in the boom year of 2021:
 The macro backdrop is structurally different this time around. Higher rates, which helped end the last big IPO wave, are back. With elevated long-end real yields and tighter financial conditions narrowing the gap between what private valuations imply and what public markets will pay, it’s plausible that the 2021 record remains.
 This year is also different because proceeds are concentrated in a relatively small number of companies. That’s partly due to multiples, as illustrated by the wearable device maker Oura, which postponed its IPO amid investor concern about the difference between its target price and the perceived fundamental value.
 Beyond the valuation gaps, it’s worth looking at how businesses have fared after going public. BCA Research’s Noah Weisberger notes that while post-listing IPO market capitalization is about $2.7 trillion, nearly twice previous peaks in real terms, when scaled to total S&P 500 market cap, that number is much more modest at 4.3%. This sits below the 1990s’ peak of over 10%:
 Weisberger points out that while that appears massive, it’s highly concentrated, largely thanks to SpaceX. Only about 200 companies came to market over the past 12 months, roughly one-third of previous peaks.
 This raises questions about how equities can absorb the additional supply. In this paper , probing possible catalysts for a burst AI bubble, Ben Inker and John Pease of GMO argue that the stock market is growing more sensitive to the surge in issuance. That makes it a credible threat, even before excessive capital expenditures outstrip plausible demand for AI services:
 Our guess is that, in the end, demand will fail to keep up with supply and the return on investment from the AI build-out will prove disappointing. But much less has been written about why the stock market has become ever more sensitive to changes in supply and demand for shares. Rising issuance does appear to be weighing on S&P 500 valuations. This year, as earnings have risen, forward multiples have compressed by about three points. Capex skepticism and higher rates might also, Weisberger says, contribute to lower multiples:
 It remains true that companies try to time their IPOs when conditions are good. As BCA Research illustrates, a rise in IPO supply typically weighs on the market’s ability to advance - there is a positive correlation between past S&P 500 returns and future IPO issuance, and a negative correlation with future S&P 500 returns. Weisberger sums up the dynamic as: “The bigger the wave, the bigger the hit to returns and multiples:”
 What are the prospects for Anthropic’s listing? So far, investors have absorbed SpaceX albeit not without some turbulence . While Anthropic’s will dominate the headlines, the release of $2 trillion worth of SpaceX shares when the lock-up period expires next summer could be far more of a problem for valuations:
 OpenAI’s IPO won’t now happen this year. When it does, it stands to be a moment of truth.
 —Richard Abbey
 Catching a Falling Guillotine
 French government bonds are under attack in a way unseen since the sovereign debt crisis that roiled the euro zone from 2010 to 2012. And yet this week, investors have proved willing to try to catch a falling guillotine blade (to use an analogy from TS Lombard’s Davide Oneglia). In two days, the spread of French over German 10-year yields has retreated from 141 to 127 basis points, while the 2-year spread has dropped from 65 to 44 basis points.
 This doesn’t mean that confidence is back, but it’s certainly a welcome respite - particularly as French students take to the streets again. Marine Le Pen, leader of France’s nationalist right and frontrunner in next year’s presidential election, helped by vowing to cut the deficit by three percentage points . The steady rise in her party’s chances certainly contributed to the ramp up in French yields:
 Is this just a pause, or can we catch the falling guillotine? The selloff in French stocks compared to the rest of the euro zone suggests things may have gone too far. Bear in mind that many of the companies are multinationals and their direct exposure to France’s economy is limited:
 Further, the last crisis, famously ended by Mario Draghi’s promise that the European Central Bank would “do whatever it takes,” provides a template. Investors believe the ECB wouldn’t wait for things to get so bad again before finally taking action.
 Further, while France is currently trading in line with its worst spread from 2012, it’s nowhere near what happened to Spanish bonds back then:
 It remains hugely significant that France is now regarded as a riskier credit than Spain. Oneglia of TS Lombard argues that the slide has run its course for now:
 A parabolic move like last week’s tends to exhaust itself, while market rumors suggest some leveraged investors were forced to close their long OAT positions. Meanwhile, 150bps has long been seen by consensus as the lower-bound of the area where markets begin to expect some policymakers’ reaction, especially given the speed of the move. In other words, betting on spreads to get to 150 basis points wasn’t too risky, but positioning for them to widen further looks much trickier. Bob Elliott of the Nonconsensus newsletter similarly argues that “the conditions here just aren’t close to what we saw back in the previous euro-zone crisis period.” It’s more of a relative bond supply issue, which can be sorted out via price changes, according to Elliott.
 Investors are also calmed by the experience of Giorgia Meloni, another right-wing firebrand, who has proved pragmatic in power in Italy. Italian government bonds known as BTPs now trade at a lower yield than French OATs. The mere fact that she felt compelled to make the announcement suggests that Le Pen acknowledges the need for a similar moderation.
 However, Nico Fitzroy of Signum Global Advisors cautions she may not be “another Meloni.” Meloni was part of a coalition, and the bond market had already felled one Italian prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi - Le Pen doesn’t have those restraints and has been moving in a more populist direction of late. Her deficit-reduction proposal revolves around cutting contributions to the European Union, which is unrealistic.
 Viktor Shvets of Macquarie asserts that investors should “ignore RN’s promise to lower deficits by more than 3% (mythical arguments of lower EU contributions and spending on immigrants),” but that there is a consensus to rein in spending.
 He adds that France is largely funded with long-term debt, with an average duration above eight years - longer than for the US, Germany or Italy. Greece, the epicenter of the last crisis, relied on very short-term funding. French productivity remains ahead of Italy, Spain, the UK and Japan, even if it lags the US, Shvets says.
 Politics still creates a lot of risk that cannot be resolved until the presidential election and the legislative elections that would likely follow. On the opposite wing of politics, prediction markets give a 12% presidential shot to Jean-Luc Melenchon, standard-bearer of the populist left, who’s argued to cancel French debt . That wouldn’t help.
 Correction
 The units were wrong in yesterday’s chart of food prices. We apologize for the error. Here is the corrected chart:
 Survival Tips
 Some reading recommendations. My old buddies at the Financial Times have just published the six-book shortlist for the Business Book of the Year Award , which these days is co-sponsored by Standard Chartered Plc. Full disclosure: I haven’t read any of them - although I did hear a fascinating talk by Sebastian Mallaby on The Infinity Machine , his book about DeepMind founder Demis Hassabis. The full list with links is here , and they all look very interesting, perhaps particularly Liaquat Ahamed’s 1873 about the Rothschilds’ role in the first Great Depression. The longlist should give you some more ideas. Might make for a well-spent flight.
 More From Bloomberg Opinion
 What Anthropic’s ‘Existential Risks’ Tell IPO Investors : Aaron Brown
 Japan’s Massive Bond Rotation Is France’s Nightmare: Shuli Ren
 FROGS Is the Name of Europe’s Latest Debt Crisis: Lionel Laurent
 Want more Bloomberg Opinion? OPIN . Or you can subscribe to our daily newsletter .
 Like Bloomberg’s Points of Return? Subscribe for unlimited access to trusted, data-based journalism in 120 countries around the world and gain expert analysis from exclusive daily newsletters like Markets Daily or Odd Lots .
 Follow Us
 |